# 0.2.1: ES6 Basics

## Variable Declaration with `let` and `const`

In Coding Basics we declared variables with `var`.

```javascript
var kilometers = 10;
var randomDiceRolls = [3, 2, 4, 5];
```

In ES6 we change variable declaration syntax to use `let` and `const` instead.

```javascript
let kilometers = 10;
const randomDiceRolls = [3, 2, 4, 1];
```

The following sections are guidelines on when to use `let` vs `const`.

### `let` for Primitive Values that Change

Use `let` if the value in our variable is a primitive data type (e.g. number, string, or boolean) and we expect the value to be reassigned.

```javascript
let kilometers = 10;
```

### `const` for Primitive Values that Don't Change

Use `const` if our variable's value will not change.

```javascript
const sidesOfDice = 6;
```

#### Reassigning a `const` Variable Throws an Error

```javascript
const pi = 3.14;
pi = 99999; // you will get an error with this line
```

### `const` for Arrays and Objects

We typically use `const` for arrays and objects, even if we plan to mutate the values inside them. This is because arrays and objects (and other variable-size data types over than strings) are known as ["mutable" data types](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Glossary/Mutable), whose variable values are actually "pointers" to "memory addresses" that store the variable-size data type. When we modify arrays and objects, the contents at their addresses may change, but the addresses and pointers themselves do not change, thus `const` is appropriate for var declarations.

```javascript
const diceRolls = [3, 4, 1, 6, 1];
```

#### Mutable vs Immutable Data Types

Arrays, objects, and data structures in general are "mutable" data types, meaning the variables that reference them actually store pointers to their memory addresses. This happens under the hood, which is why many beginner developers may not realise this. Primitive data types are "immutable" data types, thus variables that reference them store their actual values instead of pointers.

#### Altering values _inside_ an array works fine with `const`

```javascript
const diceRolls = [4, 2, 1, 4];
// the following affects values *inside* array, not address of array itself
diceRolls.push(5);
```

#### Reassigning the value of the variable that stored the array\_ \_will cause an error

```javascript
const diceRolls = [4, 2, 1, 4];
diceRolls = [5]; // this will cause an error
```

This is also related to why we cannot compare two arrays (or objects) directly with `===`. The 2 arrays being compared live at different addresses in memory, and by default it is the memory addresses being compared, not the values at those addresses.

```javascript
[1, 2, 3] === [1, 2, 3]; // this boolean statement will not be true
```

## Block Scope

Variables we define in "blocks" like an if statement will not be available anymore when we use `let` and `const`. `var` in ES5 uses "function scope", which makes variables declared with `var` accessible anywhere within a given function.

#### Old Way (Function Scope)

```javascript
var myFunc = function () {
  if (diceRoll === 6) {
    var win = true;
  }
  console.log(win); // this will be true
}
```

#### New Way (Block Scope)

```javascript
var myFunc = function () {
  if (diceRoll === 6) {
    let win = true;
  }
  // this will error. win variable doesn't
  // exist here, outside the if statement
  console.log(win);
}
```

Block scope refers to JavaScript **blocks**, which are lines of code within curly braces `{}`. These typically include if, (and else if, etc.), loops and switch statements. `let` and `const` variables declared in a block will not exist outside the block.

## 3 Ways to write Functions in Javascript

There are multiple ways to define functions in JavaScript.

### Named Syntax

The function is explicitly named in the declaration.

```javascript
function rollDiceNamed() {
  var myRandomValue = Math.random();
  return myRandomValue; 
};
```

### Anonymous Function Syntax

The function is created anonymously (without a name), then assigned to a variable.

```javascript
var rollDiceCheat = function () {
  // always return 6 to win.
  return 6;
};
```

### Anonymous Function Arrow Syntax

Another way to create an anonymous function is through the arrow syntax. Similar to the example above the function is assigned to the \`rollDiceArrow\`.

```javascript
const rollDiceArrow = () => {
  var myRandomValue = Math.random();
  return myRandomValue; 
};
```

### **Implicit Return value in Arrow Functions**

If the right side of an arrow function is a single statement, it is automatically returned by the function. Because of this arrow functions can be used to write very short functions.

```javascript
// Always get 5.
const rollDiceCheatArrowImplicitReturn = () => 5;

// Implicitly returns the result of Math.floor(Math.random() * 6 + 1)
const rollDiceArrowImplicitReturn = () => Math.floor(Math.random() * 6 + 1);
```

We also always use `const` when defining a function.

Below is a runnable code snippet that illustrates the above functions:

```javascript
function rollDiceNamed() {
  var myRandomValue = Math.random() * 6 + 1;
  return Math.floor(myRandomValue); 
};

const rollDiceCheat = function () {
  // always get six
  return 6; 
};

const rollDiceArrow = () => {
    var myRandomValue = Math.random() * 6 + 1;
  return Math.floor(myRandomValue);  
};

// always get 5.
const rollDiceCheatArrowImplicitReturn = () => 5;
//explicitly returns the result of Math.floor(Math.random() * 6 + 1)
const rollDiceArrowImplicitReturn = () => Math.floor(Math.random() * 6 + 1);


console.log(rollDiceCheat()); // always 6
console.log(rollDiceCheatArrowImplicitReturn()); //always 5

console.log(rollDiceNamed()); // legitimate dice roll
console.log(rollDiceArrow()); // legitimate dice roll
console.log(rollDiceArrowImplicitReturn()); //legitimate dice roll
```

## Template Literals

### Old Way

```javascript
let output = "you rolled " + diceRoll + ". nice job!";
```

### New Way

```javascript
let output = `you rolled ${diceRoll}. nice job!`;
```

## Exercises

### `let` & `const`

Open up the dev tools console in Chrome. Follow the `const` examples above to get the error. What does the error message say?

Go back to an old piece of code you've written. Change a few of the variable declarations to `let` and `const`.

### Arrow Functions

Go back to an old piece of code you've written. Change the function definition to use arrow functions in one place that you can easily test.

You can change the definition of the `main` function in any old code from Coding Basics.

### Template Literals

Change one string output where you used plus sign and change it to a template literal.
