# 4.1.1: Unit Testing

Unit testing is the ability to setup and test a portion of a project's code in isolation \(i.e., units\).

## AJAX Card Game Testing

Before we can begin writing tests for our code we must have an architecture to our code that enables the running of the pure logic of the app in isolation from the rest of the system.

This idea is a big shift in the way that we think about how to structure our applications. Before we begin any project it must be created with unit testing in mind. Also note that this idea of the separation of concerns, i.e., logic vs. data for example, is already a part of software engineering best practices, whether or not unit testing is implemented on the app.

In order to demonstrate implementation of unit testing in an app, we'll first refactor the AJAX card game so that we can isolate the game functionality into a module that can be tested in isolation.

This way we can build a testable game module that doesn't rely on user actions or the database, where we can verify the behavior of the game easily.

### AJAX Cards Refactor

Take a look at the branch here: [https://github.com/rocketacademy/cards-ajax-bootcamp/tree/game-module](https://github.com/rocketacademy/cards-ajax-bootcamp/tree/game-module)

The card related functionality was moved into it's own module file here: [https://github.com/rocketacademy/cards-ajax-bootcamp/blob/game-module/game/index.mjs](https://github.com/rocketacademy/cards-ajax-bootcamp/blob/game-module/game/index.mjs)

We call a module function when the user deals the cards.

### Unit Testing Setup

Now we can install the testing libraries into the project and create a first test for the functionality we currently have.

`package.json` was edited so that we can run the `test` command:

```text
npm run test
```

Full diff: [https://github.com/rocketacademy/cards-ajax-bootcamp/compare/game-module...unit-test?expand=1](https://github.com/rocketacademy/cards-ajax-bootcamp/compare/game-module...unit-test?expand=1)

## High Card

Now that we have our card game refactored into a module and the unit tests setup into the project we can add some functionality to test.

We'll add a user choice to our high-card game to make the game interesting.

#### High Card Rules

1. At the beginning of the game, 2 cards will be drawn.
2. For any hand that is dealt, the user can choose either of the cards, if they think the chosen card will beat both the next drawn pair of cards.
3. The user can decline to select a card if they don't think they can beat any of the next drawn cards.
4. When the next cards are dealt the player can either:
5. a. win a point if their selected card beats both drawn cards.
6. b. lose a point if their selected card is less than either card.
7. c. if the user did not select a card there is no change in score.
8. The object of the game is to end with the highest score after going through the deck.

We've implemented most of the game in this branch of the repo: [https://github.com/rocketacademy/cards-ajax-bootcamp/tree/unit-test-highcard](https://github.com/rocketacademy/cards-ajax-bootcamp/tree/unit-test-highcard)

## High Card Unit Test

Now that we have a game we can write some tests for the logic of the game.

In the context of a unit test, this means that we will only be testing the game module we are using inside the application, and not any of the other code that runs the game.

If we wanted to test things like the DOM manipulation code in `script.js`, we would need to write what are called [functional tests,](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Functional_testing) that mimic user actions in the system, rather than feeding values into our module code.

We wrote some tests in this branch of the repo: [https://github.com/rocketacademy/cards-ajax-bootcamp/tree/unit-test-highcard-tests](https://github.com/rocketacademy/cards-ajax-bootcamp/tree/unit-test-highcard-tests)

Take a look at the tests here: [https://github.com/rocketacademy/cards-ajax-bootcamp/blob/unit-test-highcard-tests/test/game.mjs](https://github.com/rocketacademy/cards-ajax-bootcamp/blob/unit-test-highcard-tests/test/game.mjs)

Check the branch out and run the tests with `npm run test`.

### What to Test

Knowing how to approach testing and what parts of the code to test can be confusing.

Generally speaking it can be hard for tests to cover all of the behaviour and/or cases. For most unit test suites you want to test every behaviour of the system, with a few exceptions.

**Don’t create tests that test the same behaviour with values that differ.**

You do not need to test if both the 2 of clubs and the 3 of clubs loses to a king.

**Don’t create tests that test non-deterministic values.**

Don't test for values that are based on things like the current time, or the first card of the shuffled deck.

**Avoid testing code that has side effects.**

A side-effect is when running one function results in the change or creation of a value unrelated to the return value of the function.

If several of your functions alter one global value, that can make your code hard to write unit tests for. Ideally a unit test can test code by passing values into the function to be tested and evaluate.

### Examples

Here is a simple example of a test of the `setUpdatedGame` function.

Each test should check for values related to one small set of functionality.

In this case we are testing to see if the deck has less cards in it after cards have been dealt.

```javascript
it("Updates the deck", function () {
  const game = createGame();
  const playerHand = game.playerHand;
  const updatedGame = setUpdatedGame(playerHand[0], game);

  const updatedPlayerHand = updatedGame.playerHand;
  const updatedDeck = updatedGame.cardDeck;

  expect(updatedDeck.length).to.equal(48);
});
```

There are a few ways we could have proven that we are getting the behaviour we want. We could have also added a test for the number of cards in the deck on line 2.

Notice how because we are only dealing with functions that take in values and return them back, the values we want to "fake" and the values we get back are easy to construct and test.

### Over-Testing

It may be important to balance _code-coverage,_ the total amount of code paths / cases your tests cover and the overhead of maintaining the volume of code involved with writing those tests. The worst possible case is that there is a bug in the tests that give a false positive that your application is error-free. Now you have to bug fix in the application and also in the test code.

## Exercises

Given the game rules, the tests written for the game are incomplete. Clone the repo and add new tests to test more of the game logic. If needed, fix bugs in the game code itself.
