# 2.ICE.2: Modules, Disk Reading

## Setup

Start with the [base Node repo](https://github.com/rocketacademy/base-node-bootcamp).

## Base

### CSS Conversion Module

Extract CSS command line conversions from [2.POCE.1: CSS Command Line](../2.poce-post-class-exercises/2.poce.1-command-line-colour-converter.md) into a module file called `cssConvert.js`. The module should export all the conversion functions.

### JavaScript Comment Reader

Read in a JavaScript file as per examples in [Module 2.4](../2.4-disk-reading.md#basic-example). Output the line numbers that have comments in them, each on a new line with the relevant comment.

**myJsFile.js**

```javascript
// Add 2 numbers and return the result
const add = (a, b) => {
  return a + b;
};
```

Read in the JS file.

```text
node index.js myJsFile.js
```

Command template:

```text
node index.js <JS FILE TO READ>
```

Output:

```text
Line 1: "Add 2 numbers and return the result"
```

Move the comment-reading code into its own module, e.g. `parseJs.js`, that exports a named function `showComments` that takes a filename as input.

#### index.js

```javascript
import { showComments } from 'parseJs.js';

// ... get the filename

// pass it to the module
showComments(filename);
```

## Comfortable

### JS Function Parameter Reader

List all the functions in the code and their parameters. This should work for functions in general and not just the specific function in the example below.

```javascript
// Add 2 numbers and return the result
const add = (a, b) => {
  return a + b;
};
```

Read in the JS file.

```text
node index.js myJsFile.js
```

Outputs:

```text
add: a, b
```

1. Add the parameter-reading code to the above `parseJs` module and export it as a named function, e.g. `showParams`.
2. Import and use `showParams` in `index.js` like we did with `showComments`.

### Param Reader with Sort Order

Add a command-line option to `index.js` to list functions and their parameters by line number or alphabetically by function name.

## More Comfortable

### Analysis on Files in Nested Folders

Allow your program to take an absolute path and find all files in that folder with the same name as the 4th `argv` parameter and perform either `showComments` or `showParams` analysis on those files.

For example, the following invocation may perform `showParams` analysis on all files named `script.js` inside the `/Users/kai/code` folder.

```text
node index.js /Users/kai/code script.js
```

The following GitHub Gist shows how to read file and folder names in nested folders. [https://gist.github.com/awongh/394d41f845f7f81f3b27a5cd36dccbd9](https://gist.github.com/awongh/394d41f845f7f81f3b27a5cd36dccbd9)

