# 2.ICE.5: Reading and Writing to JSON

## Introduction

We will practise reading and writing from JSON files by creating a card game that stores its game state in a local JSON file.

## Setup

1. Clone the[ base starter code](https://github.com/rocketacademy/base-node-bootcamp).
2. Copy the [hard-coded card deck array from Coding Basics](https://basics.rocketacademy.co/10-javascript-objects/10.1-javascript-objects#hard-coded-card-deck) into `index.js`.
3. Create an empty JSON file `data.json` with an empty JSON object in it `{}`.
4. Create a `jsonFileStorage.js` file in the repo with `add`, `read`, and `write` code from [Module 2.13.1](../2.13-json/2.13.1-json-file-storage-module-add-read-write.md). We will use that code in this exercise.

## Base

### Write New Card Deck

Update `index.js` to perform the following.

When a user passes the `create` parameter to our app, use the `add` function from `jsonFileStorage` to save the card deck array to`data.json` with key `cardDeck`.

Once run, open `data.json` to verify that we saved the card deck to it.

```
node index.js create
```

### Read Cards From Deck

When a user passes the `read` parameter to our app, log the card deck in `data.json` by calling the `read` function from `jsonFileStorage`.

```
node index.js read
```

### Alter the Deck - Deal Cards

We want to deal cards from the deck and have the changes be reflected in the JSON file. The `jsonFileStorage` `read` function can't help us "deal" cards because it can `console.log` card values but cannot remove cards from the deck in the JSON file.

We will access a card and alter the deck with the following steps: read from the deck, remove a card from the deck, log the card, and write the modified deck back to `data.json`.

Whenever we need to modify data in `data.json` in a new way in the following exercises, we will create a new custom function based on the `modifyJsonFile` function below, replacing the TODO comment with custom logic.

For now, we will store these custom functions in `index.js` because we reserve `jsonFileStorage` for generic JSON functions that are not application-specific. You may notice we repeat much reading and writing code in each custom function, when the only code that differs between them is the TODO section. We will learn how to provide custom app logic to generic JSON functions to re-use the common reading and writing code in Modules [2.13.2](../2.13-json/2.13.2-json-file-storage-module-passing-callbacks.md) and [2.13.3](../2.13-json/2.13.3-json-file-storage-module-summary.md).

```javascript
const modifyJsonFile = (filename) => {
  const handleFileRead = (readErr, jsonContentStr) => {
    if (readErr) {
      console.log('Reading error', readErr);
    }

    // Convert data from string to Object
    const jsonContentObj = JSON.parse(jsonContentStr);

    // TODO: Modify the data however we would like

    // Convert data from Object to string
    const updatedJsonContentStr = JSON.stringify(jsonContentObj);

    // Write updated data to file
    writeFile(filename, updatedJsonContentStr, (writeErr) => {
      if (writeErr) {
        console.log('writing error', writeErr);
      }
    });
  };

  // Read original data from file
  readFile(filename, 'utf-8', handleFileRead);
};
```

### Shuffle Existing Card Deck

1. Verify `data.json` contains the card deck from the Write New Card Deck exercise above.
2. Update `index.js` such that when a user provides the `shuffle` parameter to our app, read the existing card deck from `data.json`, shuffle it in our app, and write the shuffled version back to `data.json`. Feel free to use [card shuffling logic from Coding Basics](https://basics.rocketacademy.co/10-javascript-objects/10.1-javascript-objects#card-shuffling).
3. Open `data.json` to confirm that we've shuffled the cards.

```
node index.js shuffle
```

### Deal Cards from Deck

1. Verify `data.json` contains the shuffled card deck from the previous exercise.
2. Update `index.js` such that when a user passes the `deal` parameter to our app, move 2 cards from the card deck in `data.json` to a `currentHand` key whose value is an array in `data.json`.
3. Print the 2 drawn cards to the console.
4. Open `data.json` to confirm that we moved 2 cards from `cardDeck` to `currentHand`.

```
node index.js deal
```

## Comfortable

### High Card

1. Update `index.js` such that when a user passes the `high-card` parameter to our app, they play a game of High Card.
2. To play High Card, deal 2 cards from the card deck, 1 for the human and computer players respectively. Declare the winner based on the highest card.

#### Sample Output

```
node index.js high-card
Human: 9 of hearts
Computer: 2 of spades
Human wins!
```

### Blackjack

1. Update `index.js` such that when a user passes the `blackjack` parameter to our app, they play a simplified version of Blackjack where there is no hitting.
2. In this simplified Blackjack, each player draws 2 cards, and the game chooses a winner based on who has the highest hand value, where card values are the same as in Blackjack.
3. Feel free to re-use logic from High Card.

## More Comfortable

Feel free to refer to [Blackjack rules from Coding Basics](https://basics.rocketacademy.co/projects/project-3-blackjack).

### Blackjack Hit

Allow players to "hit" to get new cards until they "bust" or wish to "stand".

### Blackjack Dealer

Implement "dealer" behaviour for the computer player such that the dealer must hit until they reach a hand value of 17 or more, at which point they must stand.

### Blackjack Splits

Implement splitting functionality, where if a player draws 2 cards of the same value at the start of the game, they can choose to split their hand into 2 hands and play 2 concurrent hands.
