# 3.ICE.9: DB Schema Design - Carousell

## Introduction

Design a database schema for Carousell.

## Base

### ERD

Create a DB schema for Carousell by drawing an ERD for the DB, starting with only essentials for Carousell's listing and selling functionality. The real Carousell DB would have many tables, but we don't need to include everything for this exercise. In our ERD, name the tables and columns, identify data types, and define any relationships between the tables.

One trick you may encounter in this exercise is that a product listing can be associated with both a seller and a buyer, but both seller and buyer foreign keys can reference the same users table. From this we learn that a single table can have more than 1 association with the same other table.

Feel free to use the [Zoom Whiteboard](https://support.zoom.us/hc/en-us/articles/205677665-Sharing-a-whiteboard) for initial sketches. For more professional-looking ERDs, consider using the Entity Relation features of free drawing software [draw.io](http://draw.io/), or the free ERD visualisation software [dbdiagram.io](https://dbdiagram.io/home). The latter requires us to learn a custom ERD-creation syntax, but it should be relatively straightforward.

### DB Setup

Create a new local database called `carousell`. 

### `CREATE TABLE` Statements

Write and execute `CREATE TABLE` statements to create all tables and relationships in the ERD. Record these statements in a file `init_tables.sql`.

### `INSERT` Statements

Write and execute `INSERT` statements to insert dummy data into the tables. Record these statements in a file `seed.sql`. 

### `SELECT` Statements

Write and execute sample `SELECT` queries you might need to render a given page on Carousell, for example [this](https://www.carousell.sg/categories/furniture-13/shelves-and-drawers-1288) listings page. Don't worry about `INSERT` or `UPDATE` queries, or queries for searches. Record the `SELECT` statements in a file `queries.sql`.

## More Comfortable

Add tables and columns for additional Carousell features and repeat Base instructions.

