# 2.E.3: Instagram Auth

## Learning Objectives

1. Know how to decompose complex components into multiple smaller, more manageable components
2. Understand where to put authentication in a UX flow to lure users in and give them as much reason to login as possible
3. Understand how to use Firebase Authentication
4. Know how to read documentation to apply a new technology

## Introduction

We will build on the previous exercise to incorporate authentication and user information on all posts, likes and comments.

## Setup

1. Start with the code we wrote in the previous exercise in our forked and cloned copy of the [Rocket Academy Instagram starter repo](https://github.com/rocketacademy/instagram-bootcamp)
2. Set up Firebase Authentication in our local `firebase.js` as per the [official Firebase documentation](https://firebase.google.com/docs/auth/web/start)
   1. Under "Add and initialize the Authentication SDK", we will need to import `getAuth` and export a named export with the Auth object, like `export const auth = getAuth(firebaseApp);`
   2. Skip "(Optional) Prototype and test with Firebase Local Emulator Suite" and everything below it for now; that content will be covered in the next step.
3. [Enable Email/Password sign-in](https://firebase.google.com/docs/auth/web/password-auth#before\_you\_begin) in the Firebase console (Step 3 in the linked docs)
   1. Once in the Auth section of our app in the Firebase console, click "Get started" button
   2. Choose the Email/Password sign-in method from the menu
   3. Enable Email/Password

## Base: Users must login to post, posts have author identity

1. Refactor app into multiple components each in separate files for maintainability.
   1. Now that our app is starting to become complex (100+ lines of news feed code alone in `App.js`), we may want to consider refactoring `App` into multiple components for maintainability before adding new functionality such as auth.
   2. In our reference solution we separate `App.js`, `Composer.js` (the form to create new posts) and `NewsFeed.js` files for their respective components and put them in a `components` folder in `src` that contains the component `.js` files and their relevant `.css` files.
      1. This will require some re-wiring of relative imports to files such as `src/firebase.js` and in files such as `src/index.js`.
   3. Separate composer state and logic into a `Composer` component in `Composer.js` and news feed state and logic into a `NewsFeed` component in `NewsFeed.js`. Import both `Composer` and `NewsFeed` in `App.js` to render them in the `App` component as before. Revise [React docs for composing components](https://reactjs.org/docs/components-and-props.html#composing-components) for a refresher.
   4. If you customised your UI in previous exercises, feel free to decompose your components however makes sense for your UI.
2. Update our user flow such that a user needs to log in to post. They should still see the composer and news feed and be able to choose files and type text in the composer before logging in (to lure them in), but when they are not logged in, the composer's Post button will trigger our app to render an auth form instructing the user to create an account or log in before they can post.
   1. Consider storing the logged-in user as state in `App` component and using the `onAuthStateChanged` listener in `componentDidMount` to keep logged-in user state updated. `App` can pass logged-in user state to `Composer` as a prop to determine Post button behaviour.
   2. Consider also storing "should render auth form" state in `App` component and passing a class method to toggle "should render auth form" state from `App` to `Composer` such that when an unauthenticated user clicks Post in `Composer`, `App` renders the auth form instead of the composer and news feed. Once the user authenticates, auth form logic can call the same "toggle auth form" method again for `App` to render the composer and news feed again instead of the auth form.
   3. Create a new `AuthForm` component in `components/AuthForm.js` for the auth form and import it where relevant in `App`.
   4. Once the user logs in, the app should render the composer and news feed as before with the user's previously selected file and text pre-filled in the composer.
3. All posts should now render the author's identity next to the post.

## Comfortable: Identity in navbar

1. Display the logged-in user's identity in a navbar at the top of the app. Consider using [React Bootstrap's `Navbar` component](https://react-bootstrap.github.io/components/navbar/#text-and-non-nav-links) for this.

## More Comfortable: Identity for likes and comments

1. If you haven't already, implement like and/or comment functionality for posts from Comfortable and More Comfortable in the Instagram Posts exercise
2. Likes should now be associated with a user's identity, and a user can only like a post at most once
3. Comments should show the author's identity like posts

## Submission

Submit a pull request to the `main` branch of Rocket's Instagram repo and share your PR link in your section Slack channel.

If you would like to deploy your app to the internet, follow Create React App GitHub Pages [deployment instructions here](https://create-react-app.dev/docs/deployment/#github-pages).

## Reference Solution

Here is reference code for this exercise. You can do better!

To play with the solution, clone it, run `npm i` and `npm start`. We did not host a reference deployment for this solution because we will build on this repo in the following exercises and will host a reference deployment for the final one.
