# 2.E.4: Instagram Routes

## Learning Objectives

1. Understand how to use React Router to build React apps with multiple URL paths
2. Understand how to split component logic to effectively have multiple pages served by the same React app
3. Know how to read documentation to apply a new technology

## Introduction

We will build on previous Instagram exercises to incorporate React Router and create standalone pages for each post with relevant URLs.

## Setup

1. Start with the code we wrote in the previous exercise in our forked and cloned copy of the [Rocket Academy Instagram starter repo](https://github.com/rocketacademy/instagram-bootcamp)
2. Set up React Router in our repo as per the official [React Router documentation](https://reactrouter.com/docs/en/v6/getting-started/installation#create-react-app)

{% hint style="info" %}
**We will deploy on Firebase Hosting instead of GitHub Pages**

After incorporating React Router's `BrowserRouter` we will be [unable to deploy our React apps to GitHub pages](https://www.freecodecamp.org/news/deploy-a-react-app-to-github-pages/) anymore. The linked article suggests `HashRouter` but having a `#` in the middle of our URL isn't the most conventional. We will still use `BrowserRouter` but deployed to Firebase Hosting with relevant configuration to make it work.
{% endhint %}

## Base: Split `Home` and `AuthForm` pages into separate routes

In Instagram Auth we created an `AuthForm` component that renders instead of the `NewsFeed` component when our user wants to sign in. We will now create separate routes for `AuthForm` and `NewsFeed` components to make it easier for users to navigate to the auth form and news feed respectively.

## Comfortable: Dedicated page and route for each post

Clicking on posts in the news feed navigates to a standalone page for the clicked post. The standalone page should have a URL that uniquely identifies that post, and a back button to get back to the news feed.

## More Comfortable: Navbar, chat page

Add a navigation bar to the app and allow users to toggle between the news feed and chat page via navigation links. Toggling between features updates the app URL for the relevant feature.

## Submission

Submit a pull request to the `main` branch of Rocket's Instagram repo and share your PR link in your section Slack channel.

TODO: Link to Firebase Hosting deployment

## Reference Solution

Here is reference code and a reference deployment for this exercise. You can do better!
