# 3.1.1: Express with JSON DB

## Introduction

We will combine our knowledge of Express and JSON file databases to produce an app that can store and retrieve JSON data on the Internet.

## Using Express with JSON File Storage Module

### Express Server Example

```javascript
import express from 'express';

const app = express();

const handleIncomingRequest = (request, response) => {
  console.log('request came in');
  response.send('yay');
};

app.get('/', handleIncomingRequest);

app.listen(3004);
```

### JSON Read Example

```javascript
import { read } from './jsonFileStorage.js';

read('data.json', (jsonContentObj) => {
  console.log(jsonContentObj);
});
```

### Express with JSON Read Example

```javascript
import express from 'express';
import { read } from './jsonFileStorage.js';

const app = express();

const handleIncomingRequest = (request, response) => {
  console.log('request came in');
  read('data.json', (jsonContentObj) => {
    console.log(jsonContentObj);
    response.send(jsonContentObj);
  });
};

app.get('/', handleIncomingRequest);

app.listen(3004);
```

Notice the nesting of callbacks in the last example. `handleIncomingRequest` only runs when Express receives a request, and the callback passed to `read` only runs once the file is read into memory, after which we send the response back with file contents.

The main benefit of Express is that it provides an elegant way to run the appropriate request handler for each request based on request method and URL path.

## Parsing URL Path Parameters in Express

Express can extract parameterised values from URL paths of requests. This is useful for re-using code that performs similar logic across parameter values, such as `singapore` in the below example. Given paths `/location/singapore` and `/location/hongkong`, the app logic may return the same kind of location data but for different cities. [github.com](https://github.com) uses URL path parameters to determine which user's repos and files to show.

#### Sample URL with Path Parameters

```bash
http://localhost:3004/location/singapore/300456
```

#### Sample Code to Extract Path Parameters

The following route extracts `city` and `postalCode` parameters from the specified positions in the URL. Any URL with a structure like `/location/<STR>/<STR>` will match the below path matcher.

```javascript
app.get('/location/:city/:postalCode', handleIncomingRequest);
```

Express copies strings in the URL path whose positions match the entities starting with `:` in the routing method path matcher to a JS Object `request.params`. 

For example, given the following implementation of `handleIncomingRequest` for the above routing method...

```javascript
const handleIncomingRequest = (request, response) => {
  console.log(request.params);
  response.send('yay');
};
```

... the `console.log` should output something like the following.

```javascript
{
  "city": "singapore",
  "postalCode": "30045"
}
```

Try the above code with other requests and verify that the output matches what we expect.

1. [http://localhost:3004/location/KL/74665](http://localhost:3004/location/KL/74665)
2. [http://localhost:3004/location/sydney/1234](http://localhost:3004/location/sydney/1234)
3. [http://localhost:3004/location/banana/apple](http://localhost:3004/location/banana/apple)

### Path Parameters as JSON Keys or Indexes

We can use URL path params to specify the elements we wish to retrieve from JSON. For example, given the following `data.json` file...

#### data.json

```javascript
{
  "names": ["Chee Kean", "Susan Chan", "Albert", "Kai"]
}
```

... we can use the following code to extract a name at a given index. 

#### index.js

```javascript
import express from 'express';
import { read } from './jsonFileStorage.js';

const app = express();

const handleIncomingRequest = (request, response) => {
  read('data.json', (err, data) => {
    // Respond with the name at the index specified in the URL
    response.send(data.names[request.params.index]);
  });
};

// index is a URL path parameter
app.get('/names/:index', handleIncomingRequest);

app.listen(3004);
```

The above logic can be useful in apps like our noodle app, where instead of names we may have noodle recipes in our JSON array, and we may want to specify in our URL which noodle recipe to retrieve for a given page.

## Parsing URL Query Parameters in Express

In addition to URL path parameters, Express also supports extraction of URL query parameters. Query params are key-value pairs that come after `?` in URLs like `www.foo.com?myQueryParam=bar`. Keys are before `=`, values are after `=`, and key-value pairs are separated by `&`. Query params are commonly used for ephemeral data, e.g. Google search queries or Google ad click IDs that do not warrant dedicated pages on a website.

In Express request handler callbacks, we can access query params in the `request.query` object that Express creates for us. Read more about how Express handles query params [here](https://expressjs.com/en/api.html#req.query).

## When to Use Path vs. Query Params?

Path params are typically used to identify resources, and query params are typically used to filter those resources. Read more [here](https://stackoverflow.com/a/31261026).

## Exercise

1. Reproduce the above JSON file-reading server.
2. What happens when the `:index` param in the request URL is not a valid array index in `data.json`?

