# 2.2.5: Context

## Learning Objectives

1. React context allows us to access shared state from our components without passing props
2. We should use context sparingly, only for state that would be painful to share through passing props
3. How to use `useContext` to simplify syntax when using context with functional components

## Introduction

React context allows us to share state across our app without passing it as props. This is helpful for apps with many levels of component nesting when we would need to use the same state across multiple components and pass state as props through many levels of components (aka "prop drilling"). The React team recommends we use context sparingly because it makes component reuse more difficult.

> "Context is designed to share data that can be considered “global” for a tree of React components, such as the current authenticated user, theme, or preferred language." - React official docs on context

> "...sometimes the same data needs to be accessible by many components in the tree, and at different nesting levels. Context lets you “broadcast” such data, and changes to it, to all components below. Common examples where using context might be simpler than the alternatives include managing the current locale, theme, or a data cache." - React official docs on context

Please read the following official React guide on context.

{% embed url="https://reactjs.org/docs/context.html" %}
Official React guide on context
{% endembed %}

1. Feel free to skim through the API section on first read; the context components and functions will make more sense after reviewing the examples
2. Note the Dynamic Context example and how it passes `this.state.theme` as the initial value to `ThemeContext.Provider` in `app.js`. This means whenever `this.state.theme` changes in `app.js`, all components within `ThemeContext.Provider` will re-render with the new theme. The example uses a standard callback method `this.toggleTheme` defined in `app.js` to update the theme across the app.
3. The Updating Context from a Nested Component example stores the class method `this.toggleTheme` inside `this.state` itself, and passes `this.state` as the value of `ThemeContext.Provider` so that `this.toggleTheme` function is available in all components that subscribe to `ThemeContext`. This removes the need for us to pass `this.toggleTheme` via prop drilling.

## `useContext`

`useContext` is a React Hook that allows us to retrieve the latest value of the context object passed to it. It replaces context features `Class.contextType` and `Context.Consumer` from the context guide above, and can simplify our code when using functional components. Rocket recommends using `useContext` for context when using functional components.

Please read the following official React guide on `useContext`.

{% embed url="https://reactjs.org/docs/hooks-reference.html#usecontext" %}
Official React guide on `useContext`
{% endembed %}

1. Besides providing simpler syntax for reading context, `useContext` does not change the use cases for context. The examples from the official guide on context still apply, albeit with different syntax.

### Sample Implementation

{% embed url="https://youtu.be/bLHAhj_ywW8" %}
React Hooks useContext
{% endembed %}
