# 1.POCE.3: Match Game

## Introduction

Build on your Match Game from [Module 1.6: Match Game](../1.6-match-game.md). Remember to work on a forked copy of the [Coding Bootcamp Match Game repo](https://github.com/rocketacademy/match-game-bootcamp), and submit a Pull Request when finished.

Complete the match game by building more complete DOM elements for the cards. (show the card suit and name when it gets turned over).

Display on the screen somewhere the state of the game, i.e., the user needs to click another card, or the user didn't find a match, etc.

## Base

### Match Game `setTimeout`

Optimise the Match Game to use `setTimeout`. When the user clicks a square for a second time, turn the card over _and if it doesn't match the first card_, show it to the user for 3 seconds then turn it back over.

## Comfortable

### Match Game Match

When the user matches a card, show a match message for 3 seconds, then make it disappear.

## More Comfortable

### Match Game Timer

Give the user 3 minutes to complete the game. You can't display a countdown timer until we learn `setInterval`, so the user won't be able to see the time left.

### Full Match Game

Implement a full match game:

1. The player can enter their name
2. The game has a reset button
3. The game keeps score of wins

### Match Game Win Message

When the user matches all the cards, show a special message on screen for 5 seconds.

## Reference Solution

Click [here](https://github.com/rocketacademy/match-game-bootcamp/tree/solution-base) to see the reference solution for this post class.
