# 0.1: New JS Syntax

## Introduction

In Coding Basics we omitted some best-practice JS syntax to focus on foundational concepts. We introduce these best practices in Coding Bootcamp for professional software engineering.

## `+= 1`

You can use `x = x + 1` , `x += 1` , or `x++` to increment the value of variable `x` by 1. [ESLint recommends against using ++](https://eslint.org/docs/rules/no-plusplus), so we default to `+= 1` for brevity.

```javascript
var dice = 5;
var kilos = 5;
var minutes = 5;

// Old
dice = dice + 1; // 6
// New, += is recommended
kilos += 1; // 6
minutes++; // 6
```

## `for` loops

By now we should be relatively familiar with the mechanics of loops. From now onward, we will use `for` loops for loops with a fixed number of iterations.

### Old Way \(While Loop\)

In Coding Basics we used `while` loops everywhere.

```javascript
// initialize loop counter
var counter = 0;

// run 10 times
while (counter < 10) {
  // main part of the loop
  console.log(`current counter: ${counter}`);

  // increment always the last line in the loop
  counter += 1;
}
```

### New Way \(For Loop\)

For a fixed number of iterations, `for` loop syntax is more concise.

```javascript
// initialize loop
for (var counter = 0; counter < 10; counter += 1) {
  // main part of the loop
  console.log(`current counter: ${counter}`);
}
```

### Shorter Counter or Index Variable Name

It's quite common to shorten the name of our `counter` variable name to `i`, where "i" is short for "index". If your index also represents something more specific, use the more specific name, but `i` is a generally accepted short name for an index in a loop. If you have nested loops, `j` is the standard name for the index in the nested loop.

```javascript
// initialize loop
for (var i = 0; i < 10; i += 1) {
  // main part of the loop
  console.log(`current counter: ${i}`);
}
```

## Strict Equivalence \(===\)

We have been using `==` to test equivalence in our boolean statements.

When testing values, `==` does not take data type into account. This means that it is more forgiving and less work to check / correct for data type.

```javascript
3 == '3'; // true
true == 'true'; // true
```

Some equivalence checks are not intuitive for what are referred to as truthy or falsy values.

```javascript
0 == false; // true
true == 'true'; // true
'' == null; // true
```

We should default to not allowing any of the above to be true. Your code is less likely to have errors if the conditional is helping check the data and the data type.

```javascript
3 === '3'; // false
true === 'true'; // false
0 === false; // false
true === 'true'; // false
'' === null; // false
```

To make examples like these evaluate to true we can cast the variable value into the correct type:

```javascript
Number('3') === 3; // true
Boolean('true') === true; // true
```

## Exercises

1. Find an old exercise from Coding Basics
2. Update your code with new code for each of the above syntax changes
3. Make your code run without errors

{% hint style="info" %}
When making comparisons with user input in the Coding Basics starter code, logic like `input === 3`will not evaluate to `true`, because `input` is of type string.
{% endhint %}

