# 3.POCE.10: EC2 Deployment with Postgres

## Get an EC2 Instance

Use an old Amazon EC2 Instance or create a new one following instructions in [2.11: AWS Deployment](../../2-backend-basics/2.11-deploy-server-to-cloud.md).

## Update Postgres Connection Configs for Remote Deployment

We need to run our servers on port 80 for HTTP. Alter the `PORT` variable to change according to `process.argv`.

**index.js**

```javascript
const PORT = process.argv[2];

// ...
```

The following should run without errors on the command line.

```
node index.js 3004
```

Alter our Postgres connection configs to include `user` and `password` attributes.

**index.js**

```javascript
// create separate DB connection configs for production vs non-production environments.
// ensure our server still works on our local machines.
let pgConnectionConfigs;
if (process.env.ENV === 'PRODUCTION') {
  // determine how we connect to the remote Postgres server
  pgConnectionConfigs = {
    user: 'postgres',
    // set DB_PASSWORD as an environment variable for security.
    password: process.env.DB_PASSWORD,
    host: 'localhost',
    database: 'birding',
    port: 5432,
  };
} else {
  // determine how we connect to the local Postgres server
  pgConnectionConfigs = {
    user: '<MY_UNIX_USERNAME>',
    host: 'localhost',
    database: 'birding',
    port: 5432,
  };
}

// ...
```

Commit and push the changes to GitHub. We will clone this repo with the latest changes to our EC2 instance below.

## Install and Configure Postgres on EC2

Log into our EC2 instance using SSH. See [2.11: AWS Deployment](../../2-backend-basics/2.11-deploy-server-to-cloud.md#ssh-log-in) for a refresher.

Update the [apt](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/APT\_\(software\)) system and install some common libraries

```
sudo apt update
sudo apt upgrade
sudo apt install build-essential
```

Install Postgres on our EC2 instance with the following commands

```
sudo apt install postgresql
sudo apt install postgresql-client
```

Note that when these packages install, a user named `postgres` also gets created \_in ubuntu. \_Postgres SQL server system has a system of users and logins _for the server itself._ By default the configuration expects that this is one-to-one with the Ubuntu system users as well; i.e., if a user inside the Postgres system exists and wants to use the database, it is expected by default that there is also an Ubuntu user of the same name.

Start the Postgres server in the background.

```
sudo service postgresql start
```

Execute `psql` as the (Postgres server) default `postgres` user.

```
sudo -u postgres psql
```

Set a password for the `postgres` user. Record the password so that we can assign it to an environment variable later.

**Command Template**

```sql
ALTER USER postgres PASSWORD '<MY_SECRET_PASSWORD>';
```

**Sample Command**

```sql
ALTER USER postgres PASSWORD 'newPassword';
```

Exit `psql` and restart Postgres to ensure the password change gets propagated for new connections.

```
sudo service postgresql restart
```

Log out of the `postgres` user.

```
exit
```

## Clone Bird Watcher Repo to EC2

Clone the Bird Watcher repo onto our EC2 instance and `cd` into the repo folder.

```
git clone <BIRDING_REPO_CLONE_URL>
cd <MY_REPO_FOLDER_NAME>
```

Change the user to the one with the correct database permissions. `sudo su -` explanation [here](https://askubuntu.com/questions/376199/sudo-su-vs-sudo-i-vs-sudo-bin-bash-when-does-it-matter-which-is-used).

```
sudo su - postgres
```

Create your database.

```
createdb birding
```

`sudo su - postgres` changes the user and therefore changes the directory. Note the directory with your repository code and run the SQL to create your tables.

```
psql -d birding -f <ABSOLUTE_PATH_TO_REPO>/init_tables.sql
```

`-d` stands for database. `-f` stands for file path. In the following code, we assume we have a file `init_tables.sql` that contains all the queries we need to set up our database schema. If we don't have this file already, create one locally, test it, commit, and push it to GitHub before pulling it from our EC2 machine.

Test that our tables were created successfully with `psql`.

Change back to the default `ubuntu` user.

```
exit
```

## Run Bird Watcher

Run our server, setting `DB_PASSWORD` and `ENV` environment variables for our Postgres connection configs. Replace `<MY_SECRET_PASSWORD>` with the DB password we set above.

```
sudo DB_PASSWORD='<MY_SECRET_PASSWORD>' ENV='PRODUCTION' node index.js 80
```

{% hint style="warning" %}
There could be errors if your app expects data to be in the DB. If you need such data, write queries to insert it locally, [save those queries to a SQL file](../3.4-sql-applications/3.4.9-database-setup-files.md#seed-sql), commit and push those changes to GitHub, pull those changes to EC2, execute the commands in `psql`, and restart the server.
{% endhint %}
