# 3.3.5: Non-FK Relationship Data in Join Table

## Introduction

We saw with many-to-many relationships we can directly relate a given row in one table to any number of rows in another table and vice-versa. We accomplish this with a "join table", a table that contains only relational information. Now we'll expand our use of the join table to include data exclusive to the relationship between between the two joined tables.

## DB Initialisation

### Create Tables

Create `recipes`, `ingredients`, and their join table `recipe_ingredients`. Note that `recipe_ingredients` has a column called `measurement` that stores information specific to the _relationship_ between recipe and ingredient.

```sql
CREATE TABLE recipes ( id SERIAL PRIMARY KEY, label TEXT);
CREATE TABLE ingredients ( id SERIAL PRIMARY KEY, name TEXT);
CREATE TABLE recipe_ingredients ( id SERIAL PRIMARY KEY, recipe_id INTEGER, ingredient_id INTEGER, measurement TEXT);
```

### Create Recipes

Insert records to the `recipes` table.

```sql
INSERT INTO recipes ( label ) VALUES ('Udon');
INSERT INTO recipes ( label ) VALUES ('Mee Pok');
INSERT INTO recipes ( label ) VALUES ('Pasta');
```

### Create Ingredients

Insert records to the `ingredients` table.

```sql
INSERT INTO ingredients ( name ) VALUES ('fish ball');
INSERT INTO ingredients ( name ) VALUES ('soy sauce');
INSERT INTO ingredients ( name ) VALUES ('sesame oil');
```

## Add Associations and Relationship Data

### Check ID of Recipes and Ingredients

Retrieve IDs of recipes and ingredients to associate them in future queries.

```sql
SELECT * FROM recipes;
SELECT * FROM ingredients;
```

### Associate Recipes with Ingredients and Add Measurements

Imagine the following recipes have the following ingredients and measurements.

1. Udon recipe has 2 tablespoons of sesame oil and 1 tablespoon of soy sauce.
2. Mee Pok recipe has 4 fish balls and 2 tablespoons of sesame oil. 

The `recipe_ingredients` table doesn't just represent a relationship between `recipes` and `ingredients` tables. It also has its own exclusive data, `measurement`. Both `recipe_id` and `ingredient_id` are foreign keys.

```sql
INSERT INTO recipe_ingredients ( recipe_id, ingredient_id, measurement ) VALUES (1, 2, '2 tbls');
INSERT INTO recipe_ingredients ( recipe_id, ingredient_id, measurement ) VALUES (1, 3, '1 tbls');
INSERT INTO recipe_ingredients ( recipe_id, ingredient_id, measurement ) VALUES (2, 1, '4');
INSERT INTO recipe_ingredients ( recipe_id, ingredient_id, measurement ) VALUES (2, 3, '2 tbls');
```

## Retrieve Relationship Data from Join Table

### Get All Recipe IDs With Soy Sauce

To retrieve all recipes with a given ingredient, we can consult the join table `recipe_ingredients`, because the join table has the relevant information. We can then use a join query on the join table and the `recipes` table to obtain the relevant recipes' information.

```sql
SELECT * FROM recipe_ingredients WHERE ingredient_id=2;
```

### Get All Recipes With Soy Sauce

To retrieve all recipes with a given ingredient, we can consult the join table `recipe_ingredients`, because the join table has the relevant information. We can then use a join query on the join table and the `recipes` table to obtain the relevant recipes' information.

```sql
SELECT recipes.label, recipe_ingredients.measurement
FROM recipes
INNER JOIN recipe_ingredients
ON recipes.id = recipe_ingredients.recipe_id
WHERE recipe_ingredients.ingredient_id=2
```

### Get Udon Ingredient IDs

Similarly, to retrieve all ingredients for a given recipe, we can also consult `recipe_ingredients`. We can use a join query on `recipe_ingredients` and `ingredients` to obtain the relevant ingredients' information.

```sql
SELECT * FROM recipe_ingredients WHERE recipe_id=1;
```

### Get Udon Ingredient Names

```sql
SELECT ingredients.name
FROM ingredients
INNER JOIN recipe_ingredients
ON ingredients.id = recipe_ingredients.ingredient_id
WHERE recipe_ingredients.recipe_id=1;
```

