# 3.3.1: Basic SQL Commands

## Introduction

This module contains common SQL commands that we will execute in SQL command line environments and our apps. To test the queries in this module, see the environment referenced in the [Exercise section](3.3.1-basic-sql-commands.md#exercise) below.

## CREATE TABLE

CREATE TABLE creates a new table in the database we are in. It takes the table name, in this case `cats`, followed by parameters that represent the columns of that table.

```sql
CREATE TABLE cats (
  id INTEGER NOT NULL PRIMARY KEY,
  name TEXT,
  type TEXT,
  weight INTEGER
);
```

{% hint style="warning" %}
Above is the general SQL syntax for table creation. In succeeding lessons, we will be using Postresql, where the type declaration for primary key is slightly different. 
{% endhint %}

### Data Types

Notice that in SQL we specify data types of each column. `NOT NULL` means that the column cannot be `null` or SQL will throw an error, and `PRIMARY KEY` is defined below.

### Primary Key

A primary key in SQL is a unique identifier for a given row, where the key can consist of 1 or more columns. For every table in Coding Bootcamp we'll have a column called `id` that serves as our primary key. SQL allows us to have columns with auto-generated unique values for every row created, and we use this property to generate values for the `id` column.

## INSERT

Insert values into the `cats` table. The first set of parentheses in each statement references the column names, and the second references the values that correspond to those columns.

Note that we are not specifying the `id` column in the INSERT statement because `id` is auto-generated.

```sql
INSERT INTO cats (name, type, weight) VALUES ('Mr. Snuggles', 'Calico', 327);
INSERT INTO cats (name, type, weight) VALUES ('Jake AlPurrrrtsen', 'Bambino', 424);
INSERT INTO cats (name, type, weight) VALUES ('Furry Mc Furmeister', 'Persian', 512);
INSERT INTO cats (name, type, weight) VALUES ('Kai', 'LaPerm', 387);
```

{% hint style="warning" %}
Strings are always in single quotes \(`'`\) in SQL. Double quotes \(`"`\) are used to delimit database identifiers, e.g. table and column names. More about this [here](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/1992314/what-is-the-difference-between-single-and-double-quotes-in-sql).
{% endhint %}

### INSERTing multiple rows

It is possible to insert multiple rows with one statement. Different versions of SQL may have a maximum number of rows you can insert in this way.

```sql
INSERT INTO cats (name, type, weight) VALUES 
  ('Mr. Snuggles', 'Calico', 327),
  ('Jake AlPurrrrtsen', 'Bambino', 424),
  ('Furry Mc Furmeister', 'Persian', 512),
  ('Kai', 'LaPerm', 387);
```

### Retrieving results of an INSERT 

It is possible to get/re-read the inserted records by adding a RETURNING clause after the INSERT statement.

The below SQL command will retrieve the `id` of the newly created record.
```sql
INSERT INTO cats (name, type, weight) VALUES ('Kai', 'LaPerm', 387) RETURNING id;
```

## SELECT

Get the `name` column from all rows.

```sql
SELECT name FROM cats;
```

Get the `id` and `name` column from all rows.

```sql
SELECT id, name FROM cats;
```

Get the same columns in a different order.

```sql
SELECT name, id FROM cats;
```

Get all columns from all rows.

```sql
SELECT * FROM cats;
```

### SELECT ... WHERE ...

Get all columns from all rows where the value of `id` is `1`.

```sql
SELECT * FROM cats WHERE id=1;
```

### SELECT ... WHERE ... With Comparison Operators

Get all columns from all rows where the value of `id` is less than `3`.

```sql
SELECT * FROM cats WHERE id<3;
```

### SELECT ... WHERE ... With Logical Operators

Get all columns from all rows where `id` is greater than `2` and `weight` is less than `300`.

```sql
SELECT * FROM cats WHERE id>2 AND weight<300;
```

{% hint style="info" %}
Note that in SQL we use the keywords `AND` and `OR` to specify the "and" and "or" logical operators. This is distinct from the `&&` and `||` operators we use in JavaScript.
{% endhint %}

### SELECT ... ORDER BY ...

Get all columns from all rows, ordering rows by `name` in ascending order.

```sql
SELECT * FROM cats ORDER BY name ASC;
```

Get all columns from all rows, ordering rows by `name` in descending order.

```sql
SELECT * FROM cats ORDER BY name DESC;
```

### SELECT COUNT

Get the count of all rows.

```sql
SELECT COUNT (*) FROM cats;
```

Get the count of all rows where `weight` is greater than `400`.

```sql
SELECT COUNT (*) FROM cats WHERE weight>400;
```
## UPDATE

Set `name` to `Susan Chan` in the row where `id` is `2`.

```sql
UPDATE cats SET name='Susan Chan' WHERE id=2;
```

## DELETE

Delete the row where `id` is 2.

```sql
DELETE FROM cats WHERE id=2;
```

Note that a property of the unique `id` column is that if there is another insert query, the `id`s do not rearrange. Try this out by making a new `INSERT` query.

```sql
INSERT INTO cats (name, type, weight) VALUES ('Chubby Pants', 'Calico', 433);
```

Read a more complete overview [here](https://dataschool.com/learn-sql/sql-cheat-sheet/). \(Note this covers queries we won't be needing in our apps\).

## **Exercise**

For this exercise we'll use this [implementation of a SQL database](https://sql.js.org/examples/GUI/). It comes from a full JavaScript SQL database project you can read more about [here.](https://github.com/sql-js/sql.js)

Note that this implementation assumes an already created database.

For each command you paste in you have to erase the one that's currently there before pasting in the new line and run it.

In order to see the effects of the queries you'll have to run another SELECT statement to see the changes in the table.

## Further Reading

1. Past students have found this [SQL command cheat sheet](https://programmingwithmosh.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/03/SQL-Cheat-Sheet.pdf) helpful.
2. Past students have found [this CS50 video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gu980iXwY5c) helpful for understanding SQL syntax. This video includes JOIN syntax that we will cover in later modules.

