# 3.ICE.1: Bigfoot

## Introduction

Create an Express.js app that displays [Bigfoot](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bigfoot) sightings.

## Setup

Clone the [RA Bigfoot Express repo](https://github.com/rocketacademy/bigfoot-express-bootcamp). This repo contains a `data.json` file with Bigfoot sighting data.

## Base

### Get Sighting By Index

When the server receives a request to `/sightings/<INDEX>`, respond with the sighting in `data.json` that corresponds to the index in the URL.

#### Sample Request URL

```text
http://localhost:3004/sightings/0
```

### Respond with HTML

Update the request handler callback to respond with HTML.

#### Sample Response with HTML

```javascript
app.get('/sightings/:index', (request, response) => {
  const content = `
    <html>
      <body>
        <h1>hello</h1>
      </body>
    </html>
  `;
  response.send(content);
});
```

### Include Bigfoot Sighting Data in Response HTML

1. After successfully responding with HTML, use `${}` expressions in template literals to include sighting information such as `YEAR`, `STATE`, and `OBSERVED` attributes in the HTML response.
2. Verify we send the correct HTML response by sending a request with `curl`.

### Discussion Questions

1. What happens if the server does not send a response? What does that look like in the Chrome Network tab?
2. What happens if we send 2 responses from the same request handler, e.g. 2 calls to `response.send`?
3. What are other attributes in the Express `request` and `response` objects? `console.log` them to see.
4. Add an Express routing method to `/apple` that responds with "hello". Add another routing method to `/apple` \(the same path\) below the 1st that responds with "goodbye". Make a request to `/apple`. Notice that the request handler from the 1st routing method executes and not the 2nd. Verify this by moving the 2nd routing method above the 1st.
5. What are other methods we can call on the Express `response` object? Read more in Express docs [here](https://expressjs.com/en/4x/api.html#res).

## Comfortable

1. Create a route that lists all reports for a given year. 
2. To prevent information overload, only display year and state information for each report in the list.
3. No need to format output in HTML.

#### Sample Request URL

```text
http://localhost:3004/year-sightings/1989
```

## More Comfortable

### Sort By

1. Use query params to determine how to sort the list of reports.
2. The list should be sorted by state by default. The query param can determine if we should sort results in ascending or descending order.
3. No need to format output in HTML.

#### Sample Request URL

```text
http://localhost:3004/year-sightings?sort=asc
```

We can retrieve the `sort` query param from the `request.query` object provided by Express in the request handler middleware function. Read more on Express query params [here](https://expressjs.com/en/4x/api.html#req.query).

