# 3.ICE.8: Multiple Foreign Keys

## Introduction

Create a command-line app for an art museum. The museum curators develop collections for paintings to be part of. Collection names can reflect their school, art movement, years, or donors. For example, a collection might have the name "The New York School: Art and Mania" and contain 2 paintings from the New York School. A different collection could have the name "The Cubist Epoch" and contain 3 Cubist paintings. Collections can contain paintings by different artists. A painting is credited to a single artist, and can only be part of 1 collection at a time.

## Base

### DB Setup

1. Create a new database called `museum`.
2. Create 3 tables: `artists`, `collections` and `paintings`. Record the `CREATE TABLE` statements in a file `init_tables.sql` for debugging purposes.

### App Setup

1. Begin with the [base Node repo.](https://github.com/rocketacademy/base-node-bootcamp)
2. Install the `pg` library with NPM.
3. Use the code from [3.4.2: PostgreSQL Node App](../3.4-sql-applications/3.4.2-postgresql-node-app.md#select) as a template for `index.js`. Remember to update `pgConnectionConfigs` to reference the new DB name.

### Insert Seed Data

The museum is mounting 2 shows, 1 on the [New York School](https://www.wikiart.org/en/artists-by-painting-school/new-york-school) and 1 on [Cubism](https://www.wikiart.org/en/artists-by-art-movement/cubism). Use the links to populate the database by writing `INSERT` queries for each table. Note that the exercises below assume that the tables have been pre-populated.

### Create Painting and Add to Collection

#### Command Template

```
node index.js new-painting <PAINTING_NAME> <ARTIST_ID> <COLLECTION_ID>
```

#### Sample Command

This command assumes "Henri Matisse" has artist ID 2 and the collection you intend to place the painting in has ID 3.

```
node index.js new-painting 'Marguerite' 2 3
```

### Get Artists in the Collection

#### Command Template

```
node index.js get-artists <COLLECTION_NAME>
```

#### Sample Command

This command assumes you've named the Cubism collection "The Cubism Show" in the database.

```
node index.js get-artists 'The Cubism Show'
```

```
1. Picasso
2. Max Weber
3. Georges Braque
```

## Comfortable

### Create New Collection and Move Paintings into It

The museum is mounting a new show. Put paintings that the museum already has into the new collection.

#### Command Template

```
node index.js new-collection <COLLECTION_NAME> <PAINTING_ID> [<PAINTING_ID> ...]
```

#### Sample Command

This command assumes that paintings 'Girls of Avignon' and 'Marguerite' already exist in the DB with IDs 1 and 2 respectively.

```
node index.js new-collection 'Paris in 1907' 1 2
```

## More Comfortable

### Create Painting and Add to Collection (with Artist and Collection Names)

#### Command Template

```
node index.js new-painting <PAINTING_NAME> <ARTIST_NAME> <COLLECTION_NAME>
```

#### Sample Command

```
node index.js new-painting 'Yellow, Cherry, Orange' 'Mark Rothko' 'The New York School'
```
