# 0.1.5.2: Try Catch

## Learning Objectives

1. Try-catch syntax allows us to handle errors from code in `try` blocks gracefully without crashing our apps

## Introduction

Conceptually, the following is how try-catch syntax works. When there is an error in a `try` block, e.g. a request to a nonexistent URL, the error will cause our program will crash unless we catch that error in a `catch` block.

```javascript
try {
  // Invalid URL will cause this function to throw an error
  axios.get('nonexistenturlabc123.com');
  // Catch block catches that error and allows us to handle it gracefully
} catch (error) {
  console.error(error);
  // Handle error gracefully
}
```

Try-catch can be useful in both frontend and backend code. In frontend, we can prevent erroneous API queries from crashing our app by gracefully letting our user know something went wrong. In backend, we can prevent erroneous database queries from crashing our server and gracefully return a 503 Server Error message instead of failing to respond to the client.

Try-catch syntax is not directly related to promises, but is commonly used together with async-await promise syntax (see [0.1.5.3: Async Await](0.1.5.3-async-await.md)). We will learn try-catch first before async-await. Our programs so far have not been complex enough to warrant try-catch, and we introduce it now that our programs send network requests with a higher likelihood of crashing our apps.

## What triggers the `catch` block?

An "**exception**" is a type of control flow that halts code flow and exits out of successive parent functions until it is caught and handled by a `catch` block. The goal of exceptions is to inform a higher level of the program of an error. If an exception is not handled, it causes the program to exit or crash. Most runtime errors trigger exceptions, e.g. accessing an invalid array index or object property.

### Example: Uncaught Exception

In the following examples we use the `throw` keyword to generate exceptions.

Here is what happens when we do not catch an exception.

{% code title="index.js" %}
```javascript
console.log("About to throw!");
throw "Throwed";
console.log("Threw");
```
{% endcode %}

When we run `index.js` we get the following output.

```
$ node index.js
About to throw!

index.js:2
throw "Throwed";
^
throwed
(Use `node --trace-uncaught ...` to show where the exception was thrown)
```

Notice the program crashed before the last `console.log`. Uncaught exceptions will end program execution no matter how many levels deep.
